We have seen one algorithm for the minimum
cost spanning tree namely prim's algorithm.
Now, let us look at the other strategy we
talked about namely Kruskal's algorithm.
So, we are looking for a minimum cost spanning
tree, in a weighted undirected graph. So,
prim's algorithm starts with some edge and
gradually expands the edge into a tree, whereas
Kruskal's algorithm follows the other strategy,
which is to order all the edges in ascending
order of weight. So, it keeps trying edges
from smallest to largest and for every edge
if it can add the edge without violating a
tree property, it adds it.
Now, in the process of adding the edge, it
may not actually construct a tree, all it
make sure, it does not violate the tree property,
namely, it does not produce a cycle. So, if
we keep adding edges, so long as we do not
produce a cycles and at the end the claim
is we get a minimum cost spanning tree.
So, here is a kind of high level view of the
algorithm, so let the edges be sorted in order
e 1 to e m. So, we start with an empty tree,
so again we will keep the tree as the list
of edges and now we are going to scan this
in order, 1 to m. So, let i be the index of
the edge to be try next. So, long as we are
not yet added n minus 1 edges. Remember that
if you add n minus 1 edges and we have a connected
graph, it must be a tree. This is one of the
various characterization that we said about
trees.
Trees are n minus 1 edges, but any connected
graph with n minus 1 must be it. So, once
we have n minus 1 edges we can stop. So, so
long as length of the tree in terms of number
of edges is not n minus 1, we have to add
some more edges. So, we look at the next e
i, if e i does not form a cycle when added
to TE we append, then we look at i plus 1.
If it does form a cycle, we just discarded
and go ahead, this is all Kruskal's algorithms
is. Scanning through all the edges and until
we have found a tree, it is just keep looking
at each edge in turn in ascending order of
the weight and every time if it can add it
without forming a cycle it will add it, if
cannot add it without forming a cycle it will
drop it.
So, let us look at the same example that we
saw for prim's algorithms. So, here this smallest
edge weights, so remember that we have sorted
it in edges. So, 5 is the smallest then 6,
then we have 3 of weight 10, then we have
18, then we have 20 and then we have 70. So,
now if we pick among these the smallest one,
we start with edge 5 we first add the edge
5 to our tree.
Now, the next one is 6, so we add 6 to our
tree. Now, we have to pick one of the edges
labelled 10, we can pick any one, so let us
assume that we pick this one. Now, we want
to pick another edge label 10, because the
next two edges are again label 10. So, supposing
we pick this edge label 10, then this edge
label 10, form this cycle.
So, we cannot do it, so we discarded it, we
discard it and go to the next one. So, now
we pick this one, so we throw this away and
now we will go to this one.
And now this one we can add, so now we have
finished the tens, so the next one is 18,
but again adding 18, we going to form a cycle.
So, we discard it and now we go to the next
one which 20.
Now, having added 20, then we still are not
done, because we have added we have still
to add enough edges we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
edges and we need 6, because we have 7 vertices
quickly, we get n minus 1 edges. So, the only
edge left is this 70, so we have that any
way. So, this is the spanning tree form of
Kruskal's algorithm, we actually scan through
all the edges in this particular case and
on the way we dropped a couple.
So, Kruskal's algorithms is, also a greedy
algorithm, in this case we do not make a...
So, in prim's algorithms more as Dijkstra's
algorithms, we make incremental choices, local
choices at every point, we will look at what
we do next, based on what we know now. Here,
we make a choice well in advance, we say right
at the beginning let us sort all the edges
and do it in that order. And again it is not
clear by doing it in this particular order
which is decided right at the beginning gives
us overall an optimum solution.
So, once again we will use the same result
that we used for prim's algorithm, this minimum
separator lemma. So, recall what the lemma
said, it said if you take a set of vertices
and separate out into two non empty groups
U and W and if we take the smallest edge,
now the graph is connected. So, there must
be an edge connecting these tool, we take
the smallest edges which connects the two
parts together, then this edge must be there
at every spanning tree, every minimum cost
spanning tree, this is what the lemma said.
So now, in Kruskal's algorithm, unlike in
Prim's algorithm, at intermediate stages,
we don't have a tree, we just have a collection
of components, so we'll have in our overall
graph , we will have some vertices which are
connected here, then maybe someother vertex
there, and another part there, and so on.
Because as we add edges, it just connects
them. Okay? So whenever we add an edge in
general, it will take two currently different
components and connect them. We can't add
an edge within a component because each component
is like a tree. So, adding an edge in a tree,
remember forms a cycle. So, this won't happen.
So, what we will do, is we will add edges
across.
Now, what we know is that whenever we add
an edge, its end points are in disjoint components.
So, in terms we are using the lemma, let us
call capital U to be the component containing
one end point of the edge and capital W to
be the rest, whatever is outside this, so
this is whatever is outside component. So,
we have U and whatever it is connected to.
So, this is my set U and then I have the rest
of the vertices, so U is connected at this
point to something in a different component,
but that an all the other components is what
I called that W.
So, now what we know this is the first time
that we are trying to connect U to V, U to
V have not been connected, so far. But, we
have been looking at edges an ascending order
of weight, so if you look at all the edges.
So, this current edge we are called e j, so
if you look at all the edges e 1 to e j minus
1 none of them connected U to V or the component
connecting U.
Because, had it component containing U to
the component containing V then we wouldn’t
be adding this edge, this edge forms a cycle.
So, this is the first edge that we can use
connect these two, means that no edge we have
seen, so for a connects these too. So, putting
all this to together, this is the smallest
edge which connects capital U to something
outside capital V.
And since is this smallest edge, the lemma
tells us this must be in the tree and therefore,
Kruskal's idea of including this in tree is
sound, this is an edge it must be input tree.
So, every edge the Kruskal's algorithm adds
is actually a valid edge justified by the
minimum separator.
So, now we have to just decide how to keep
track of this property of forming a cycle.
Remember that whenever we add an edge, you
must first check if it forms a cycle and if
it does not form a cycle you must include.
So, the easiest way to check, that the edge
does not form a cycle is to keep track of
the components, if the edge is inserted on
two different components that is one end point
of the edges and one components and one end
point of the edges in other component. Then,
inductively each component is a tree and therefore,
these two trees are disjoint and therefore,
the new edge does not form a cycle. If the
two end points are in the same component then
it will form a cycle. So, keeping track whether
are not a new edge forms a cycle is equivalent
to keeping track of components. So, how do
we keep track of components, well, we can
basically label the components by numbers
and it since we have n vertices and initially
there all n independent vertices with no edges
in the initial starting point of Kruskal's
algorithms, everything is disconnected.
So, initially we are n vertices n components,
the most natural thing to do, is to say, that
each vertex i belongs to a components part
i. Now, I can add an edge u, v if the component
of u is different from the component of v.
And if the component u different from components
of v what happens after this is the two components
become the same. So, add some on merge the
two components, in other words, I have to
give them the same label.
So, this is now detailed explanation of the
algorithm, so as before we let e 1 to e m
being the edges sorted by weight, initially
we say let every vertex 1 to n is in its own
components for every j among to n components
of j is j. So, 1 is the components 1 and 2
is components 2 and so on, now we start off
with an empty set of edges and now we are
going to run through as we said before these
edges in ascending order. So, we have the
index pointing to the first edge in may sorted
array, so this is my index.
So, so long as we are not add it n minus edges,
we look at the i th edge in this sorted order,
it is of sum u to v. If the current component
of u is different in the current component
of v, then we are sure that the edge v i add
does not form a cycle. So, we add it to our
tree and now we have to do this merging of
components, now what is the component of the
vertex is just a number.
So, for every j in our set now the problem
is that these components could have been merged
earlier. So, components of u could contain
other vertices component of v could other
vertices and all of them must now we given
the same component number. So, that they are
all the same component, so I have no choice,
but to scan every j in my set of vertices
and whenever such a j has the same components
as v I reset which component to u.
So, after this everything which has the same
component number as v as got the same components
numbers u. So, therefore, effectively the
two components have been merged into one component
all label by the value components of u. So,
this is Kruskal's algorithms, just says keep
considering edges and if they connect different
components add them and merge the components,
if they do not connect different components
it will form a loop, so just throw it away.
So, what is the complexity well a first step
in Kruskal's algorithms requires us to sort
edges. So, we know that we can sort m edges
in m log m time, but m is at most n square,
so log n will be 2 times log n. So, order
of log n is the same as order of log m. So,
I can also write this is m log n, so this
will be just another way of writing. So, this
sorting takes m log m time.
Now, we have an outer loop, okay, so this
loop which runs here, in general runs through
all the edges in this list. Because, it could
very well be that for some reason I have go
all the way the last one forms a tree. Rather,
even in the example we saw of the largest
edge has to be include in the tree, because
it is the only one that connects us some particular
vertices.
So, we have an outer loop which runs m times,
now among these m times we will update the
components for each edge we add that will
happen only n minus 1 times. But, when we
update the component, that is when we have
a problem, because we have to scan through
all the vertices in order to change the components
number. So, each update of the component,
each merging components that it is order n
time and this itself happens n minus 1 times.
Because, we have to keep doing each time we
add an edge to our tree, there are going to
be exactly n minus 1. So, we have to n minus
1 updates and each update takes order n times.
So, we have an overall complexity of order
n square. Now, remember that prince algorithm
n square was the worst case and then we said
with the better data structure we could bring
it down to n plus m log n.
So, what can we do here? So, let us look at
the problem, the problem is basically this
labeling strategy. Now, when we label the
components and do this linear scan we are
spending order n time in order to merge components.
So, we will find just like we can use the
heap for Dijkstra's algorithms and Prim’s
algorithms to find them minimum vertex to
be added quicker and to update the distances,
here we will find that what we need to do
is maintain this component structure.
So, assume that we want to deal with a set
v which is broken up into different components.
So, it has components at any given times say
call a, b, c, d, e and then you have individual
elements which belong to this components.
So, some of them have many, sum of them have
one and so on. So, one of the things you want
to do is given the name of vertex v, you want
to ask which components does it belong to.
So, this is called find, given the v, find
the component containing v. The other thing
is given two vertices.
So, suppose I am given a u and v it will say
merge these two, so take these two components
and give then the same name. So, either call
them all c or call them all d, so this is
called union, union does not take the components
it takes two representatives, one representative
one components and one representative from
the other components and themselves merge
everything which is in the components of the
u with everything in component v.
And these are the two operation; obviously,
that we do is Kruskal's algorithms, find v
is what we if have an edge u, v to check if
they are the same component we find the component
of u write the component of v if they are
the same. That means, they are in the same
component. They are different, they are in
different components and we can add this edge.
Now, if you add the edge then we have to do
union u v, so these are precisely a two operations
and we will find that the there is this data
structure which is called union find because
of these two operations, which can actually
do this efficiently.
And efficiently means what, it means it can
eliminate this n square thing and bring everything
down to the cost of m log n or remember this
we need to sort. Our first step was a sort
the edges for Kruskal's algorithms starts
by sorting in the edges. So, m log n is something
which we need to m equal to sort the edges.
In addition, these essentially this updates
as in a heap, the updates the union find reverse
is actually log n. And remember that there
are going to be a these updates are happening
in this iterative loop. So, we actually get
something similar to this now Prim's algorithm
complexity.